Deadpool 3: Deadpool and Wolverine

Overview

Deadpool & Wolverine is a 2024 American superhero film based on Marvel Comics featuring the characters Deadpool and Wolverine. Produced by Marvel Studios, Maximum Effort, and 21 Laps Entertainment, and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the 34th film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) and the sequel to Deadpool (2016) and Deadpool 2 (2018). The film was directed by Shawn Levy from a screenplay he wrote with Ryan Reynolds, Rhett Reese, Paul Wernick, and Zeb Wells. Reynolds and Hugh Jackman respectively star as Wade Wilson / Deadpool and Logan / Wolverine, alongside Emma Corrin, Morena Baccarin, Rob Delaney, Leslie Uggams, Aaron Stanford, and Matthew Macfadyen. In the film, Deadpool learns that the Time Variance Authority is set to destroy his home universe and works with a reluctant Wolverine from another universe to stop them.

Development on a third Deadpool film began at 20th Century Fox by November 2016, but was placed on hold after the studio was acquired by Disney in March 2019. Control of the character and Fox's X-Men film series was transferred to Marvel Studios, which began developing a new film with Reynolds. It integrates Deadpool with the MCU and retains the R rating of the previous Deadpool films, a first for the MCU. Wendy Molyneux and Lizzie Molyneux-Logelin joined in November 2020 as writers. Reese and Wernick returned from the previous films for rewrites by March 2022, when Levy was hired as director. They, along with Reynolds and Wells, had difficulty figuring out the film's story until Jackman decided to reprise his role as Wolverine from the X-Men films in August 2022. Several other actors from the X-Men films and other Marvel productions also returned as part of the film's multiverse story, which serves as a tribute to Fox's Marvel films. Filming began in May 2023 at Pinewood Studios in England, with additional filming in Norfolk, Los Angeles, and at Bovingdon Film Studios. Production was suspended in July due to the 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike, but resumed in November and wrapped in January 2024. The title was revealed a month later.

Deadpool & Wolverine premiered on July 22, 2024, at the David H. Koch Theater in New York City, and was released across the United States on July 26 as part of Phase Five of the MCU. It has grossed over $1.26 billion worldwide, becoming the highest-grossing R-rated film of all time and the second-highest-grossing film of 2024.



Plot

In 2018, after Wade Wilson uses Cable's time-travel device to prevent the death of his girlfriend Vanessa, he travels from his universe, Earth-10005, to Earth-616 on the "Sacred Timeline", hoping to join the Avengers and give his life added meaning. He is rejected by Happy Hogan and returns to his universe. Six years later, Wade has broken up with Vanessa, retired from being the masked mercenary Deadpool, and works as a used-car salesman with his friend and former X-Force member, Peter.

During Wade's birthday party, the Time Variance Authority (TVA) captures him and brings him to Paradox, who explains that they are an organization outside of time that monitors the Sacred Timeline and wider multiverse, and that they have been watching over him for a while. Paradox reveals that Wade's timeline is deteriorating as a result of the death of its stabilizing "anchor being", Logan, while protecting his daughter Laura. Paradox plans to use a "Time Ripper" device to accelerate this process and offers to spare Wade by sending him to the Sacred Timeline where he is expected to play an important role in future events. Wade steals Paradox's TemPad and uses it to travel to Logan's grave, hoping to resurrect him and save their timeline. When this fails, Wade travels the multiverse searching for a replacement alternate universe "variant" of Logan.

Wade returns to the TVA with a Logan variant but is told by Paradox that an anchor being cannot be replaced, and that this variant is considered "the worst Wolverine" in the multiverse. When Wade deduces that Paradox is acting without the knowledge of his superiors, Paradox sends Wade and Logan to the Void where all things are consumed by the creature Alioth. Logan agrees to work with Wade when he claims that the TVA can change his timeline. Wade and Logan are captured with Johnny Storm and taken to Cassandra Nova, the powerful and sadistic twin sister of X-Men leader Charles Xavier. Cassandra, who made a deal with the TVA to oversee the Void, kills Johnny and leaves Wade and Logan to be consumed by Alioth, but the pair manage to escape.

Logan and Wade meet a Deadpool variant called "Nicepool" who directs them towards a resistance group that have been fighting Cassandra. On the way, Logan realizes that Wade is bluffing, and the pair fight until both are left unconscious. They are found by the resistance group, consisting of Laura, Elektra, Blade, and Gambit. Wade proposes an alliance to fight Cassandra, and Laura convinces Logan, distraught over his reluctance that led to the death of his fellow X-Men, to join the cause. The resistance members distract Cassandra's henchmen while Wade and Logan block her powers by placing Juggernaut's helmet on her head. Cassandra is betrayed by her follower Pyro on behalf of Paradox and almost dies until Logan convinces Wade to remove the helmet. Cassandra heals herself and opens a portal to Earth-10005, which Logan and Wade jump through.

Cassandra learns about Paradox's plan from Pyro, kills him, and follows Logan and Wade to Earth-10005. She learns about the Time Ripper's completion and how to use it from Paradox's mind and plans to destroy all timelines, leaving only the Void. Cassandra summons the "Deadpool Corps", an army of Deadpool variants who kill "Nicepool" and battle Wade and Logan until Peter arrives and distracts them. Paradox tells Wade and Logan that one of them could destroy the Time Ripper by disrupting its power flow, but this would kill them, even with their powers. After a brief argument, both Wade and Logan destroy the Time Ripper together, killing Cassandra in the process, and are able to survive by sharing the burden. Paradox is arrested by the TVA's Hunter B-15, who congratulates Wade and Logan and says their actions have stopped Earth-10005 from deteriorating. Wade asks Hunter B-15 to save the resistance group from the Void and change the history of Logan's world. She explains that the latter is not possible because Logan's history is what led to him being a hero now, and allows Wolverine to stay in Wade's world. Wade invites Logan to meet his friends, and with encouragement from Logan, reconciles with Vanessa.



Cast

Ryan Reynolds as Wade Wilson / Deadpool:
A wisecracking mercenary from Earth-10005 with accelerated healing but severe scarring over his body after undergoing an experimental regenerative mutation to treat terminal cancer. Wade begins the film retired from being Deadpool, no longer dating Vanessa, and working as a used car salesman. Writer Rhett Reese described Deadpool as a fish-out-of water in the film, a lunatic dropped into the "sane world" of the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). Though Reynolds said the audience did not have to take Deadpool seriously, particularly with his fourth wall breaking and unreliable narration, he wanted them to be invested in the other characters. Deadpool's opening dance number was performed by Nick Pauley, who is credited as "Dancepool". Reynolds also portrays the variant Nicepool, who has no scars or healing factor, for which he is credited as "Gordon Reynolds".
Hugh Jackman as Logan / Wolverine:
A former member of the X-Men and a mutant with healing abilities, retractable claws, and an adamantium-infused skeleton. This Wolverine is a variant from an alternative universe where he let down its inhabitants. This, and the pairing with Deadpool, allowed Jackman to explore new aspects of the character not developed in his prior appearances in 20th Century Fox's X-Men film series. Jackman said Logan and Wade are opposites and have a "quarreling dynamic", while director Shawn Levy said their relationship is affected by both characters being "haunted with regret". To prepare for the role, Jackman began a vigorous workout routine that included eating up to 8,000 calories a day. Jackman also portrays several other Wolverine variants in the film, including: one with the character's comic book-accurate height of 5 feet 3 inches (160 cm); Wolverine's gambling alter-ego Patch, who wears an eyepatch and a white tuxedo; an Old Man Logan variant; a variant being crucified on a giant X, reminiscent of the cover of Uncanny X-Men #251; a variant wearing the brown and tan costume from comic book artist John Byrne who fights the Hulk, as the character did in his first appearance in the Incredible Hulk comics; and an Age of Apocalypse variant with "glam rock-like" hair, one hand, and a black and red costume.
Emma Corrin as Cassandra Nova:
A mutant in the Void with telekinetic and telepathic powers, who is the twin sister of Charles Xavier. Corrin was excited to play a villain in the film as they had not played many villainous roles before. Corrin took inspiration from Christoph Waltz's character Hans Landa in the film Inglourious Basterds (2009), while Reynolds highlighted Corrin's humanization and the motivation of the character, comparing Cassandra's "mischief, danger, and unpredictability" to the energy of actor Gene Wilder. Reynolds and Levy explained Cassandra to Corrin as someone who would endear and charm others to the point that "you are going to be best friends for life" only to realize she could easily kill them. Corrin was interested in having a physical transformation for the role but was told by the studio that this was not required for the character. Corrin also wanted to pay homage to Patrick Stewart and James McAvoy's performances as Xavier in previous X-Men films, as well as be faithful to Cassandra's relationship with him from the comics.
Morena Baccarin as Vanessa Carlysle: Wade's former fiancée
Rob Delaney as Peter Wisdom: A car salesman alongside Wade and a member of his X-Force team
Leslie Uggams as Blind Al: Wade's blind elderly roommate
Aaron Stanford as John Allerdyce / Pyro:
A pyrokinetic mutant working for Cassandra in the Void. He wears a more comics-accurate costume than in the films X2 (2003) and X-Men: The Last Stand (2006).
Matthew Macfadyen as Mr. Paradox:
A Time Variance Authority (TVA) agent who oversees an unsanctioned project to speed up the death of Earth-10005 with a "Time Ripper" machine. Paradox hopes to prove himself to become the leader of the TVA.
Also reprising their roles from the previous Deadpool films are: Karan Soni as Dopinder, a taxi driver and admirer of Wade; Brianna Hildebrand as Negasonic Teenage Warhead, a teenage member of the X-Men with the mutant power to detonate atomic bursts from her body; Shioli Kutsuna as Yukio, Negasonic Teenage Warhead's girlfriend and fellow X-Men member; Stefan Kapičić as the voice of X-Men member Piotr Rasputin / Colossus; Randal Reeder as Buck, a friend of Wade from his mercenary days; and Lewis Tan as Rusty / Shatterstar, a member of X-Force. Other characters from previous Marvel films include Tyler Mane as Victor Creed / Sabretooth, reprising his role from X-Men (2000); Aaron W. Reed as Cain Marko / Juggernaut; and Mike Waters as Frederick Dukes / Blob. Uncredited actors include Billy Clements as the Russian, Eduardo Gago Munoz as Azazel, Jade Lye as Lady Deathstrike, Ayesha Hussain as Psylocke, Daniel Medina Ramos as Toad, Curtis Small as Bullseye, Chloe Kibble as Callisto, and Nilly Cetin as Quill.

Returning Marvel characters that form the resistance group in the Void include: Dafne Keen as Laura / X-23, Logan's biological daughter, from Logan (2017); Jennifer Garner as Elektra Natchios, a skilled fighter who uses a pair of sai weapons, from Daredevil (2003) and Elektra (2005); Wesley Snipes as Eric Brooks / Blade from New Line Cinema's Blade film trilogy (1998–2004); and Chris Evans as Johnny Storm / Human Torch, who can fly, control fire and set his body aflame, from Fantastic Four (2005) and Fantastic Four: Rise of the Silver Surfer (2007). Additionally, Channing Tatum joins them as Remy LeBeau / Gambit, who he was attached to star as in an unproduced Gambit film. Keen rewatched Logan to help prepare for her return as Laura after seven years, and was eager to explore an older version of the character who now has a better understanding and appreciation of what Logan went through in Logan. Snipes worked out to be "Blade-ready" for the film. After struggling with Reynolds's humor when the pair co-starred in Blade: Trinity (2004), Snipes said he finally understood it within the context of Deadpool & Wolverine which made it an enjoyable experience. Evans, who previously portrayed Steve Rogers / Captain America in the MCU, said Marvel Studios was more relaxed about creating Johnny's costume, which is a rundown version due to the character living in the Void, compared to the process for the Fantastic Four films.

The film features several variants of Deadpool, including: dog actor Peggy as Mary Puppins / Dogpool; Reynolds's wife Blake Lively as the voice of Ladypool, who is physically portrayed by stuntwoman Christiaan Bettridge; Reynolds and Lively's children Inez and Olin Reynolds as Kidpool and Babypool, respectively; Nathan Fillion as the voice of Headpool; Matthew McConaughey as the voice of Cowboypool; Wrexham A.F.C. player Paul Mullin as Welshpool; Reynolds's stunt double Alex Kyshkovych as Canadapool; an uncredited Harry Holland, brother of Tom Holland (who portrays Peter Parker / Spider-Man in the MCU), as Haroldpool; and Kevin Fortin, also uncredited, as Zenpool. Deadpool variants played by undisclosed actors include Watari / The Fool, Deadpool 2099, Golden Age Deadpool, and Piratepool.

Jon Favreau reprises his MCU role of Harold "Happy" Hogan, along with Wunmi Mosaku as Hunter B-15 from the MCU series Loki (2021–2023). Chris Hemsworth appears as Thor through repurposed archival footage from Thor: The Dark World (2013), while a version of the Hulk appears fighting a variant of Wolverine. Cameo appearances include Henry Cavill as a Wolverine variant dubbed "Cavillrine", Wrexham A.F.C. player Ollie Palmer as a bar patron, Greg Hemphill as a bartender, and Reynolds's oldest daughter James as a screaming mutant. Reynolds's co-chairman of Wrexham Rob McElhenney filmed a cameo as a TVA soldier, but his appearance was ultimately cut.



Filming

Principal photography began on May 22, 2023, in London and at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, England, under the working title Tidal Wave. George Richmond served as the cinematographer after working with Levy and Reynolds on Free Guy. Reynolds lobbied Marvel Studios to film in Vancouver, where he is from and the previous Deadpool films were made, but conceded that "they have their established infrastructure, and you just have to sort of fall in line". However, a United States Copyright Office filing for the film indicated that some filming did occur in Vancouver. Levy worked with Marvel Studios and the producers of the Netflix series Stranger Things (2016–present), on which he was an executive producer, to allow him to direct for that series' final season since the schedules for the two projects were expected to overlap. Filming was not expected to be impacted by the 2023 Writers Guild of America strike that began in early May, outside of Reynolds being unable to contribute to the script during filming as he had done for the previous films. Marvel Studios was reportedly planning to shoot what they could during principal photography and make any necessary writing adjustments during the film's already scheduled reshoots. The film was shot on location where possible, to create a more grounded feeling than can be achieved with soundstages. In June, the film's release date was moved forward to May 3, 2024. Filming for a car crash scene took place in London in early July 2023. Shortly after, Jennifer Garner was revealed to be appearing in the film as Elektra Natchios after portraying a version of that character in the Fox-produced film Daredevil (2003) and its spin-off Elektra (2005); Garner denied her involvement.

Filming with Reynolds and Jackman took place in Norfolk in early July. Production was suspended on July 14 because of the 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike. 35 days of filming were completed before the shutdown, with another 35 days left. Filming was set to resume following the conclusion of the dual Hollywood strikes. Disney paid to keep the film's sets intact during the strike. During the hiatus, Levy and Reynolds began work on the editing and visual effects, though they had not prioritized filming major visual effects sequences before the strike. Prior to the strike, Baccarin completed filming all of her scenes, and Levy shot a sequence that he likened to the lightsaber duel between Luke Skywalker and Darth Vader in Return of the Jedi (1983). He asked the film's stunt team to look to that scene's blocking, tempo, and framing. Another key action sequence in the film is the one that Reynolds wanted to be set to Madonna's "Like a Prayer", which evolved to include Wolverine alongside Deadpool. Reynolds did not know what he would do if Madonna did not allow the song to be used.

Levy acknowledged some of the casting rumors surrounding the film—including Garner appearing as Elektra, Liev Schreiber returning as Victor Creed / Sabretooth from X-Men Origins: Wolverine (2009), and Taylor Swift making a cameo appearance as Dazzler—and said some of them were true, but would not confirm which ones. Swift was later stated to not be appearing in the film. Levy said the characters that were included, such as Aaron Stanford reprising his role as John Allerdyce / Pyro from X2 (2003) and X-Men: The Last Stand (2006), were added as the story developed rather than being based on a wishlist of characters and cameos that the producers wanted to include. They did not want cameos or "global MCU stakes" to be the focus of the film, and were able to include "deep-cut" references to Marvel's history because Deadpool can serve as a Marvel fan through his fourth wall-breaking. Soni said several cameos were intended to be a surprise for the audience, and added that the film was "taking full advantage of the MCU" and would feature jokes about Feige.

The film, along with others that were mid-way through production at the start of the strikes, was said to be a top priority for the studios to resume production following the conclusion of the SAG-AFTRA strike. In October 2023, Levy questioned if the film would be able to retain its May 2024 release date given the SAG-AFTRA strike was still ongoing at that time, shortly before it was reported that the film was likely to be delayed to a date later in 2024 even if filming was able to resume by the start of that year. After the conclusion of the SAG-AFTRA strike on November 9, filming was expected to resume in London within the following two weeks before Thanksgiving. Reynolds announced that the character Dogpool would appear in the film, played by dog actor Peggy, and the film's release date was pushed back to July 26, 2024. Filming resumed by November 23. Levy said his time editing and reviewing footage during the strikes allowed him to gain a better understanding of the film, and he was able to return to work without feeling rushed and with a focus on what was needed to complete it.

In early December 2023, set photos revealed that the characters Victor Creed / Sabretooth and Toad were appearing in the film. They resembled their appearances in the film X-Men in which they were respectively portrayed by Tyler Mane and Ray Park; Mane was confirmed to be reprising his role as Sabretooth in a trailer released in June 2024, while Toad was confirmed in the film's final trailer the next month, portrayed by an uncredited Daniel Medina Ramos. Set photos also revealed a giant 20th Century Fox logo set piece. Reynolds commented shortly after about the set photo leaks, saying they created a difficult situation for the production and expressing his hope that websites would stop publishing unfinished, out-of-context leaked images to "preserve as much of that magic as possible for the finished film and the big screen". He noted that the franchise is associated with leaks since the first Deadpool film was able to be made following a leak of its original test footage. Reynolds proceeded to post faux leaked images featuring Mickey Mouse, Predator, and Steve Urkel, along with various hashtags to try to alter the social media algorithm around the actual leaked photos since platforms prioritize posts from high-profile accounts. Levy said the presence of paparazzi on set was a "price we're comfortable paying" as he opted to film practically rather than rely on sound stages and green screens. After photos of Reynolds and Jackman in costume were leaked, Levy decided to release an official photo to "give the world a proper introduction".

Rob McElhenney, Reynolds's co-chairman of Wrexham A.F.C., visited the set to film a cameo appearance while also discussing matters for their football team given Reynolds's filming schedule. This visit was captured by the Welcome to Wrexham (2022–present) documentary series, which showed McElhenney wearing a TVA agent uniform. The scene McElhenney appeared in was ultimately cut, with Reynolds explaining that once they began editing the scene, the sequence was not working as intended and Reynolds kept it in the film for longer than normal because of McElhenney's appearance. At the end of December, Bona Film Group signed a deal with TSG Entertainment to invest in a slate of films, including the Deadpool franchise; TSG Entertainment and 20th Century Studios both receive "in association with" credits on the film.  In early January 2024, Variety reported that the film would include several characters from prior Fox-produced Marvel films and that it was expected to take a similar approach to Spider-Man: No Way Home (2021), which features multiple characters from past Spider-Man films coming together. Set photos at the end of the month showed Reynolds wearing a samurai-inspired Deadpool costume. Principal photography, which also took place at Bovingdon Film Studios, wrapped on January 24. One day of filming then took place in Los Angeles to film Jon Favreau's appearance as Happy Hogan, reprising his role from previous MCU films, and to film the opening dance sequence with choreographer Nick Pauley.
